docs(hipdnn): consolidate TESTING.md strategy documentation (#10760)
ROCm/rocm-libraries: projects/hipdnn/docs/TESTING.md

# hipDNN Testing Strategy

- **Owner:** `@ROCm/hipdnn-core` (see [CODEOWNERS](../../../.github/CODEOWNERS))

> **In a hurry?** Read [The short version](#the-short-version), then use
> [Choosing the Right Test Type](#choosing-the-right-test-type) before writing a test or
> [Known Risks and Gaps](#known-risks-and-gaps) before deciding how much confidence to place in a
> green check.

This document describes how hipDNN is tested today, which validation runs automatically, where
validation ownership changes hands, and what is not covered. It is the strategy and governance layer.
Detailed commands, test-authoring conventions, layer reference, release procedures, and the
run-record template are consolidated below.

This is a current-state document, not a statement that every desired control exists. A merged change
is present on `develop`; merge status alone does not prove that every supported configuration,
sanitizer, performance workload, or release requirement was validated.

## The short version

> **Where confidence comes from.** Fast GoogleTest suites exercise each hipDNN layer and the public API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Where confidence comes from.** Fast unit test suites exercise each hipDNN layer and the public API
```

[TheRock CI](../../../.github/workflows/therock-ci.yml) supplies separate on-device coverage where its
live package matrix selects hipDNN, and runs its `standard` wrapper unless paths or labels cause it
to skip. [Pre-commit](../../../.github/workflows/pre-commit.yml) and
the [Libraries PR Bot](../../../.github/workflows/libraries-pr-bot.yml) also run. Checked-in workflow
files show when jobs run; they do not expose repository branch-protection settings, so this document
does not claim that every listed status is a required merge check.

**What is not automated.** hipDNN does not enforce the 80% code-coverage target and has no checked-in
Codecov upload or threshold. `ROCm/dnn-benchmarking` uses the hipDNN Python bindings to run graphs
defined in JSON. Performance testing is manual and has no set cadence today; weekly regression runs
are planned. The trusted ASAN check is also manual. Pull-request sanitizer jobs build but do not run
tests, and scheduled ASAN infrastructure is not yet an owned hipDNN signal.

**The biggest gaps.** No automated performance signal; pre-submit covers only the quick/smoke subset

> of intended validation; tolerance overrides, skips, and other test workarounds lack one consistent

Reviewer: How is quick/smoke a gap?

validate numerical correctness on their supported GPU architectures. That split determines which
test layer owns a change.

## Development Workflow

Use [Getting Started](../README.md#getting-started) for the entry point,
[CONTRIBUTING](../CONTRIBUTING.md) for the contribution and pull-request workflow, and
[Building](Building.md#quick-start-guide) for setup and build procedures. This document adds only
the testing decision: which validation must accompany each change. Exact commands live in
[Developer Testing Commands and Authoring Reference](#developer-testing-commands-and-authoring-reference).

| Change | Minimum validation before push | GPU |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Backend, frontend, or SDK internal logic | Matching unit suite; then `hipdnn-unit-check` | Usually no |
| Public backend or frontend API | Black-box API/integration suite; then `hipdnn-integration-check` | Depends on path |
| Frontend-to-plugin routing or graph execution | End-to-end integration test | Depends on operation |
| Provider graph support or numerical behavior | Shared cross-provider bundle/test against reference executor | Yes |

> | Provider-specific error, determinism, or tuning behavior | Provider integration suite | Yes |

Reviewer: Probably `hipdnn-quick-check` / `ctest -L quick` now, though `standard` is probably recommended. I believe the unit and standard checks are now deprecated. This would require that the `quick` suite have sufficient coverage though.

| Component | Location | Primary scope |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Backend | `backend/tests/` | Descriptors, plugin system, handles, graph extensions, errors, utilities |
| Frontend | `frontend/tests/` | Attributes, nodes, graph construction, validation, utilities |
| Data SDK | `data_sdk/tests/` | Data objects, logging, utilities |
| FlatBuffers SDK | `flatbuffers_sdk/tests/` | Serialized graph objects and helpers |
| Plugin SDK | `plugin_sdk/tests/` | Plugin API utilities and engine base classes |
| Test SDK | `test_sdk/tests/` | CPU references, validation helpers, test utilities |
| Provider | `dnn-providers/<name>/tests/` | Provider internals that do not require end-to-end graph execution |

GoogleTest is the test framework and GoogleMock is used for dependency seams. Unit tests must be fast,
isolated, deterministic, and runnable on Windows and Linux. Any test that truly needs a device must
use `SKIP_IF_NO_DEVICES()`; the skip means the configuration was not covered, not that GPU behavior
passed.

The `unit` CTest label selects the current unit binaries listed in
[`test_categories.yaml`](../test_categories.yaml). Naming and `TEST`/`TEST_P`/`TYPED_TEST` guidance live

> in [Quick Reference](#quick-reference).

Reviewer: I believe the `unit` label was kept for legacy compatibility.

**Not covered by unit tests:** real provider discovery across an installed deployment, numerical
correctness of provider kernels, ASIC-specific behavior, and full frontend-to-provider execution.

### Integration Test Strategy

**Purpose:** validate behavior across public interfaces, component boundaries, real runtime layers,
or GPU hardware that an isolated unit test cannot represent.

| Layer | Location | What it proves | Real GPU/provider |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Backend API | `tests/backend/` | Public C API behavior, descriptor lifecycle, execution and plugin-management contracts | Fake plugins; GPU only for GPU paths |
| Frontend-backend | `tests/frontend/` | Graph creation, descriptor conversion, routing, and execution flow | Fake plugins; no numerical solution validation |
| Provider integration | `dnn-providers/<name>/integration_tests/` | Provider-specific errors, determinism, support, and tuning behavior | Yes |

> | Cross-provider | `dnn-providers/integration-tests/` | Same graph executed through every registered provider plugin and compared with a reference | Yes |

Reviewer: I'm not sure this is a cross-provider test; each provider is run independently of the others. The integration-tests executable is provider-agnostic, not cross-provider.

  MIOpen, hipBLASLt, and hip-kernel engines.
- Unsupported operations skip through a shared support check.
- Provider-owned TOML files define engine-specific tolerance overrides and skips.

See [Provider Integration](../../../dnn-providers/integration-tests/README.md#provider-integration)
for wiring and execution details.

Choose the test format based on what the test needs to prove:

- **Bundle:** Default for running a graph and comparing its output with a reference. Use one graph
  JSON for one case, or a template plus `sweep.json` for many shapes, data types, or layouts.
- **C++:** Use for behavior that graph data cannot express, such as error paths, API contracts,
  serialization, determinism, and benchmarking controls.

See [Two Ways to Test a Graph](../../../dnn-providers/integration-tests/README.md#two-ways-to-test-a-graph)
and [Bundle Formats](../../../dnn-providers/integration-tests/README.md#bundle-formats-single-graph-vs-template-sweep)
for authoring, migration, and golden-data details.

Put general graph correctness tests in the shared suite. Use a provider-specific integration

> directory only for behavior unique to that provider.

Reviewer: This appears to be a duplicate of content in [Provider Integration](../../../dnn-providers/integration-tests/README.md#provider-integration)

> Current limitations:

Reviewer: These appear to be things to be aware of, not limitations. Maybe "Current status" as is used in the sections below.

- Core `quick`, `standard`, `comprehensive`, and `full` categories run the same tests because `quick`
  matches all tests and the higher tiers add no patterns.
- The shared GPU-reference/framework category file enables `quick` and `standard`; its
  `comprehensive` and `full` blocks are disabled. MIOpen- and hipBLASLt-wrapped registrations for
  the external `hipdnn_integration_tests` binary do define all four tiers.
- Data-driven bundles require `--allow-bundles`; current provider CMake callers do not enable them,
  so the wider provider tier registrations still omit bundle cases.
- Exact TheRock package-test selection depends on live configuration outside this repository.

#### Existing test workarounds and tolerance overrides

> The cross-provider harness supports provider-owned TOML files for numerical tolerance overrides and

Reviewer: Maybe:
```suggestion
The integration-tests harness supports provider-owned TOML files for numerical tolerance overrides and
```

  execute for the changed scope. Failures require investigation.
- **Informational/manual:** coverage reports, manual sanitizer runs, manual benchmarks, and release
  evidence not produced by a required PR workflow.
- **Unstable/flaky:** hipDNN has no encoded quarantine, owner, expiry, or tracking convention. Do not
  treat retry success as proof. File a tracking issue, preserve the original failure, assign an owner,
  and restore trusted status after fixing the cause.

PR workflows are not automatically retried. Nightly workflow failures may be retried on fresh
runners up to four total attempts for infrastructure failures; attempt history remains evidence and
must not be hidden.

## Coverage

hipDNN uses LLVM source-based coverage. Configure with `-DHIPDNN_ENABLE_COVERAGE=ON`; targets include
`unit-coverage`, `integration-coverage`, and `coverage`, with text, HTML, and LCOV output under
`coverage-report/`.

The measured objects are the backend library plus selected backend, frontend, public-backend, and SDK
test binaries. The report excludes dependencies, tests, generated data objects, `HipErrorHandler`,

> and Test SDK mocks. It does not include provider objects, and `hipdnn_public_frontend_tests` is not

Reviewer: I wonder if omitting `hipdnn_public_frontend_tests` is intentional or an oversight? It feels like an oversight.

| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| hipDNN core | `@ROCm/hipdnn-core` | Component unit, API, routing, documentation |
| Providers and shared integration | `@ROCm/dnn-providers-core` | Numerical correctness and supported ASIC coverage | Provider support matrix and CI inventory are not centralized here |
| Repository CI | `@ROCm/rocm-libraries-reviewers` | Workflow definitions, runners, shared policy | Branch required-check settings are external to repository files |
| TheRock / `therock-ci-config` | TheRock/CI owners | Build, package, and live test matrices | Exact package selection can change outside this repository |
| QA/release stakeholders | Not recorded here | Release qualification and sign-off | Ownership and exception process are not documented |
| Downstream consumers | Framework teams | Compatibility/system validation | No component-owned pre-merge downstream signal is documented |

## Improvement Roadmap

### Near term

1. Publish the actual branch-protection required-check list and keep it synchronized with this file.
2. Enable sanitizer test runners for labeled PR workflows and decide whether one sanitizer lane should
   become required; coordinate with TheRock issue #3433.

> 3. Create hipDNN tracking issues for Windows ASAN failures and every sanitizer exclusion, with owner,

Reviewer: I believe this is already available.

   affected configurations, and re-enable criteria.
4. Publish a repeatable coverage baseline for the current scoped object list and resolve whether 80%
   remains an aspiration or becomes an enforced floor.
5. Assign a named technical lead/document steward and validation-area owners.

### Medium term

1. Wire cross-provider data bundles into registered provider CI.

> 2. Define real incremental content for core `standard`, `comprehensive`, and `full` tiers; give the

Reviewer: I believe this is a zero-value effort.

| Windows has no ASAN CI and no dated clean baseline or tracked failure inventory | High | High | Manual Windows ASAN build/run | Untracked |
| Sanitizer exclusions lack issue IDs, owners, expiry, and consistent mode handling | Medium | High | Exclusions are visible in CMake | Untracked |
| TSAN has build support but no documented successful run or CI | Medium | High | Standard tests and code review | Untracked |
| UBSAN and MSAN are absent | Medium | Medium | Compiler warnings and manual hipDNN-only clang-tidy | Untracked |
| Missing symbolizer only warns; fail-on-error/leak settings are not an explicit cross-platform policy | Medium | Medium | Runtime defaults and CTest failure handling | Untracked |

### Coverage and test surface

| Gap | Regression risk | Impact | Mitigation today | Tracking |
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |
| 80% coverage is not enforced and no current baseline is published | Medium | Medium | Manual LLVM coverage targets | Untracked |
| Coverage scope omits providers and `hipdnn_public_frontend_tests` | Medium | Medium | Integration tests still execute outside report | Untracked |

> | Core `quick`, `standard`, `comprehensive`, and `full` tiers are identical | Medium | Medium | Full current core suite still runs under every tier | Untracked |

Reviewer: This is not an issue.

Refer to [Coding Style and Naming Guidelines](CodingStyleAndNamingGuidelines.md) for test naming conventions.

---

### 1. White Box Testing (Unit Tests)

White box tests focus on internal implementation details of hipDNN components.

#### Component Comparison

| Component | Location | Purpose | GPU Testing | Environments |
|-----------|----------|---------|-------------|--------------|
| **Backend** | `backend/tests/` | Test internal implementation of hipDNN backend | Minimal/None | Windows & Linux |
| **Frontend** | `frontend/tests/` | Test internal implementation of hipDNN frontend | Minimal/None | Windows & Linux |
| **Data SDK** | `data_sdk/tests/` | Test internal implementation of Data SDK | Minimal/None | Windows & Linux |
| **Plugin SDK** | `plugin_sdk/tests/` | Test internal implementation of Plugin SDK | Minimal/None | Windows & Linux |
| **Test SDK** | `test_sdk/tests/` | Test internal implementation of Test SDK | Minimal/None | Windows & Linux |
| **Provider** | `dnn-providers/<name>/tests/` | Test internal implementation of a specific provider | Minimal & fast | Windows & Linux |

> 
> Note: If a test depends on the GPU then it needs to be marked with `SKIP_IF_NO_DEVICES()` so tests run and pass correctly on CPU only machines.
> ---

Reviewer: Needs a blank line before `---`.
```suggestion
Note: If a test depends on the GPU then it needs to be marked with `SKIP_IF_NO_DEVICES()` so tests run and pass correctly on CPU only machines.

---
```

- **Enforcement**: No checked-in hipDNN workflow uploads coverage or enforces a threshold. Current measured baselines are not published.
- **Scope**: The instrumented object list excludes providers and `hipdnn_public_frontend_tests`; see [TESTING.md § Coverage](#coverage).

> [!NOTE]
> Code coverage measures execution of the instrumented object set. It does not establish behavior, provider, OS, or GPU-configuration coverage.

#### Test Environment Compatibility

Tests must work in the following environments:

| Environment Type | Supported Methods |
|-----------------|-------------------|
| **CLI Build Environment** | `ninja hipdnn-check`, `ninja hipdnn-check-verbose` (standalone also has the unprefixed `check`) |
| **IDE** | Visual Studio Code and extensions like TestMate |
| **Artifacts** | • Installed testing artifacts<br>• Running built test executables |
| **Operating System** | • Windows<br>• Supported Linux distros |

> [!TIP]
> `ninja hipdnn-unit-check` runs fast, isolated unit and API tests (also: `hipdnn-unit-check-verbose`).<br>
> `ninja hipdnn-integration-check` runs slower, end-to-end integration tests (also: `hipdnn-integration-check-verbose`).<br>

> > In a standalone `projects/hipdnn` build the unprefixed aliases (`check`, `unit-check`, `integration-check`, ...) also exist. See [ctest vs. check targets](#ctest-vs-check-targets) for the full ctest/check-target mapping.

Reviewer: This section seems to be doubling-down on the ninja-check approach; it may be better served by discussing test categories (quick, standard, comprehensive, full) instead. Also, as mentioned elsewhere, I believe unit and standard are deprecated, but worth confirming.

#### Static Analysis

clang-tidy is limited to eligible hipDNN C++ sources, headers, and tests. The complete `hipdnn-tidy` scan is manual, excludes provider components and HIP-language code because clang-tidy does not reliably analyze HIP compilation, and has no regular cadence. See [TESTING.md § Static Analysis](#static-analysis).

#### Flaky Tests

Flaky tests are not an accepted final state. hipDNN has no encoded quarantine, owner, or expiry convention today; record the original failure, file a tracking issue, assign an owner, and restore trusted status after fixing the cause.

### 4. Performance Testing

[`ROCm/dnn-benchmarking`](https://github.com/ROCm/dnn-benchmarking) uses the hipDNN Python bindings
to run JSON graph workloads. Runs are manual today; weekly regression runs are planned. See
[Performance and Benchmarking](#performance-and-benchmarking) for current details.

---

> ## Release and Milestone Test Plan

Reviewer: The release strategy should be discussed here, but the plan, and definitely the template, do not belong in this file.
